[music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLots podcast. [music] I'm Joe
Weisenthal.
>> And I'm Tracy Aloway.
>> Tracy, it's been too long since we've
done an electricity grid episode. I've
been avoiding it on purpose, Joe. I in
all honesty, I I really find this
particular market slissue a difficult
one to talk about because it's
impossible to talk about it in broad
terms. And I know on OddLots, we try to
avoid doing that generally, but even in
an hourong podcast, even with multiple
episodes, we could do an episode for
each electricity market in the United
States and still only scratch the
surface, right? Like you have to talk
about regulated monopolies versus
competitive markets and then you have to
talk about what's an independent system
operator and what's like well what's
Texas that's a whole other issue.
>> What is Texas? What is Texas?
>> What is Texas? [laughter]
>> What is Texas would be its own episode.
But yeah that's right. You ask a
question to a grid expert and their
first thing and they're like wait are
you talking about a competitive market
or regulated market here? That always
>> metered basis or unmetered or I don't
know. Uh yeah, behind the meter etc.
Yeah. But anyway, obviously with the
sort of Ian Dunning who we recently had
Hudson River Trading, he was talking
about how you know their main constraint
is power and that's just a small a very
small in the grand scheme of things user
of AI services. We were talking about
using AI and high frequency trading and
he said even more than chips that the
power constraints are their biggest
constraints right now. And so I do think
that one thing we have to think about is
if especially how long can this AI boom
go on is what's it going to take to get
all of this AI activity on the grid like
how constrained is it?
>> That's right. And we also recorded that
episode with Sager and Jetty and we were
talking about the political
controversies surrounding AI and
obviously power consumption is a big one
of those at a time when electricity
prices have already been rising. Is AI
only going to drive them up further?
Although that said,
>> you can't even say that electricity
prices have been rising because in
certain states they've actually been
going down on an inflation adjusted
basis. So even that is a nuanced
picture.
>> But by and large, especially since the
pandemic really by and large we have
seen faster than normal increase in
electricity price inflation and we have
the big AI question. So we really have
to figure out a how is all of this new
data center capacity going to come onto
the market who's going to supply the
generation and then who is going to bear
that cost. Is it going to be the
consumers who are already generally
speaking across several markets seeing
their bills go up?
>> If we have to talk about this rubber
band ball market then I'm glad we at
least have the perfect guest to do it.
>> That's all I'm going to say.
>> We do in fact have the perfect guest.
very excited to say we're going to be
speaking uh with someone been trying to
get on the podcast for a little while,
Travis Kavula. He is a VP of regulation
at NRG Energy. He's also been on a
public commission in Montana, so he
knows that side of the business in terms
of how prices are set in those regulated
monopoly markets. He's also an academic.
Travis, thank you so much for coming on
OddLots.
>> It's great to be here. Thank you.
>> We're really excited about this one
because there are so many questions. Why
are we talking to you? Why don't you
give us the sort of brief intro of what
you do and what your background is so
that our audience has some idea of why
you're the perfect guest?
>> Sure. So, I spend my time on regulatory
affairs at a company NRG. We're a big
producer of power. We sell power to
enduse customers where that's permitted
by law where competition exists in the
power and gas markets. So, we've got
about 8 million enduse customers. And
previously I was the head of the Montana
Public Service Commission, the rate
setting body for regulated utilities in
the state. I headed up an organization
that represents state utility
commissions at the national level called
NEOUK. And I teach a little bit on the
side at University of Chicago's Harris
School of Public Policy, a course on
utility regulation and electricity
markets. So I spend my time thinking a
lot about what goes into customer bills.
Both the stuff that we can control being
a company that is a provider and also
stuff that are sort of upstream costs of
goods sold that that appear on my
company's bills. The sort of poles and
wires charges that go in into people's
bills. So ba basically, you know,
there's two parts of people's bills. The
commodity and the regulated grid charges
that get the commodity to you. And both
of those are subject to some form of
regulation in this industry.
>> Yeah, Tracy, when we were in Chicago
recently for a live episode, I met one
of Travis's students there and he's
like, "You got to talk to Travis. Travis
is the man that will explain all these
things." So glad we're finally making
this happen.
>> I'm glad I have a high rating for from
[laughter] the students. That's
important.
>> From rate my professor. That's right.
Okay. So, no pressure, Travis. All
right. So you were talking about the
wholesale cost of the thing that goes
across the wires and the poles and all
of that. So that's electricity versus
the actual transmission system. One
thing that we hear whenever this topic
comes up is it's not necessarily about
the wholesale cost of electricity. It's
the cost of actually maintaining and
expanding the grid. How much truth is
there to that? If you're going to
pinpoint the dominant factor behind
higher electricity prices right now, is
it the wholesale price or the actual
trans cost of transmission? Yeah, it's
kind of the scope of time that you
choose to evaluate, but you know, just
to give you kind of a benchmarking, you
know, if you looked at say the New
England power market over the last 20
years, which sort of is the beginning
point of the in the restructuring of the
industry and the introdu introduction of
competition in a place like New England,
the actual commodity cost would have
fallen by about 50% on an inflation
adjusted basis. whereas on the same
basis transmission costs would have
increased something like 900%. Now from
a very low level to a much more
substantial level but then if you drew
that comparison in another market say
the Mid-Atlantic over a shorter period
of time like year-over-year you know the
grid costs would not have risen
substantially in a year but power prices
would have and that's really just
because the commodity works on more
fundamental kind of supply and demand
balance. You know, scarcity will drive
up prices relatively rapidly and then an
over supply that occurs when the market
is moving back toward equilibrium will
drive prices down rapidly. Whereas those
regulated set of costs that attach to
the transmission and distribution
systems, you know, those are still cost
plus regulated industries and they have
a funny way of working monirectionally
up over the course of time. But these
two things trade up trade off against
one another. You know, you need to
invest in transmission in order to
facilitate the efficient delivery of
electricity. You need to invest in it in
order to open up regions for lowcost
renewable energy production. So, they do
have an interactive effect, but they're
regulated in a very different way. And
both of those land on consumers bills. I
I think the easiest way to understand
this is that, you know, consumers in a
sense had maybe been as a result of the
regulated charges the proverbial frog
and gradually warming water. And then
when you finally enter a commodity super
cycle, people can have the sense that,
oh wow, someone just ratcheted up the
heat on this pot. But both of those are
contributing factors and they require
sort of different structural approaches
in order to reckon with them.
>> Joe, this is my perennial frustration
talking about electricity prices and the
electricity system in the US, which is
you cannot talk in generalities, right?
There are different types of regulations
for different entities. There are
different regulations for each state
basically. There's, you know, the New
England system, then there's the West
Coast, and then there's Texas, which is
its own special entity. You kind of have
to talk about every single market in
isolation, which is difficult even on a
hourong podcast. So that's going to be
the caveat throughout this conversation.
I think
>> it's idiosyncratic. And it's funny
because at the same time restructuring
and competition was introduced into this
industry, it was also occurring in
things like telecom. Telecom, you know,
was substantially deregulated and
federalized at the same time. States,
however, were left to make their own
decisions about the power sector. And as
a result, you really have a huge
patchwork quilt of state and federal
regulation and different industry
models. It's true.
>> I have a really another really
rudimentary question, I guess. What are
we even talking about when we talk about
competition in electricity? You know, I
don't get to choose which wire I get
into. there's one utility I have the
option from. Sometimes there are these
people on the street and they're like,
"Oh, sign, will you sign up for clean
power or something like that and they
try to get me to do stuff, but I don't
really understand how that works because
I don't understand how electrons can be
directed to anyone's home." So, I'm
always very skeptical of that. What do
we talk about when people talk about a
competitive market?
>> Yeah. So, think of the electricity
system as sort of a chain of links.
Upstream you've got the power generators
and then after that you've got the high
voltage transmission system. It patches
into a substation that steps down the
voltage to a lower level. That's what we
would call the distribution system. And
then there's a meter hanging on the side
of your home and beyond that meter you
are the consumer of electricity. The
most upstream the generation and the
most downstream retailing have been
opened in some states to competition.
And I think it's fairly intuitive what
that means for generation. Power plants
are owned by private investors who make
investments in them. Those power plants
compete against one another in auctions
for electricity and sell their power to
wholesale offtakers. Some of those
offtakers then are the retailers of
electricity who sort of buy an upstream
supply of goods and then use the
regulated poles and wires and pay
regulated rates to deliver that
commodity to you at your home. So some
of the value proposition of what you're
experiencing as a potential retail
customer in a competitive market is your
product selection. I mean, to give an
example, a retailer came to me and
marketed me a 5-year fixed price for
electricity last year. I bought it. I
locked in a rate. I'm insulated from
upstream, you know, changes in wholesale
market volatility as a result. That's
generally the value proposition of
competitive retail. Though, in places
like Texas, you're also seeing product
differentiation that has a ring of
telecommunications and data competition.
sort of like more apps as part of your
retail electric supply service. People
selling you smart thermostats or
residential batteries that can be
packaged onto your retail electricity
supply plan to sell back to the grid,
help manage your costs upstream to
stabilize pricing. But that's the
paradigm of competition in this space.
It's a regulated system in the middle
with competition on the edges.
Can we back up for a second and go back
to that big restructuring of the market
because I have a feeling this will help
us understand our current situation. But
what was the problem that we were trying
to solve back then? You know, people
have short memories. A lot of people
would say that our electricity system
right now has its own special problems
and they would forget that there were
previous problems that this system was
meant to address.
>> Yeah. I mean, it's kind of haunting.
It's funny you should ask that question
because the problem it was meant to
address is that regulated utilities
which used to own this whole chain of
links on a consolidated vertically
integrated basis bet wrong very badly on
the amount of demand growth in the
sector. and they put themselves out
there building power plants that were
intended to be included in what's called
their rate base on which they earn a
return and are able to charge off those
costs to a captive set of customers.
When they bet wrong on the demand that
would ultimately materialize on the
system, they found themselves well over
their skis in the amount of power
generation that they either had built or
were in the process of building. At the
heart of regulated utility economics is
this division problem where kind of a
total system of fixed costs is the
numerator divided by the denominator of
throughput. So these regulated utilities
were adding handsomely to the numerator.
The denominator wasn't propping up that
and the result was that division problem
spitting out a price that was escalating
higher and higher. Some utilities at
that point their state regulators said
you've been imprudent. we're going to
not allow you cost recovery because
you've been imprudent. They went
bankrupt. But that was the exception to
the rule. Most of them allowed those
costs to be recovered from a captive
customer base. But some of those states
also passed laws that said, "Let's never
do this again. There's no reason why we
shouldn't have power generation invested
in to meet the levels of demand needed
on the system be a function of investors
competitive bets in the market. And so
in about you know call it a third of the
states but accounting for more than half
of the power sold that's now the
business model where companies like mine
are you know have to make guesses about
what the demand is going to be and try
to voluntarily
contract with us to produce revenue for
the power generation we might invest in.
And for the rest of the country, it
still works by, you know, people like me
wearing my former hat, you know, as a as
the chairman of a utility commission,
like guessing what the future is going
to be and charging off the cost of those
gases to a monopolized customer base.
[music]
>> [music]
>> Let's talk about your former hat because
one of the things you hear about is that
the utilities have this incentive to
overinvest because that might help
determine what they're allowed to charge
on a going forward basis. But why don't
you sort of talk about your former hat
and the basic role you played, how you
thought about decision making and how we
are to understand what the world looks
like from the standpoint of someone
sitting on that regulatory commission.
>> Yeah. Well, you're number one, you're
absolutely correct about the incentives
at play under the style of economic
regulation that is widely used really
without exception in the United States
to regulate the monopoly industries in
the utility sector. The companies earn a
return that is sort of announced in
advanced by their state or federal
economic regulators based on the amount
of capital they've invested in the
system. So spend more make more has some
paradoxical effects where the most
amount of profit a utility will ever
make is in the first year that it owns a
particular asset and then when they own
it free and clear they actually earn
zero profit. So sort of an inversion
[laughter] of the cash flow paradigm
that you would expect out of competitive
businesses. Regulators also establish
the depreciation lifespan for ratem
purposes of regulated assets which has
some interactive effects with that
model. So that that's basically the
gristin mill of what state regulatory
utility commissions do. They determine
the amount that is quote unquote used
and useful in service to customers of
the capital investments that utilities
have made. They also establish an
allowance for so-called prudently
incurred expenses the on&m on the system
around which the utility earns no margin
just gets a recovery of those costs. And
that that also has the knock-on
incentive of if I'm a utility and I look
at a problem that I have to solve, I'll
always want to solve it with capital
investment. I will never want to solve
it with opex, you know, and because that
one earns a return, one does not. So
ordinary tradeoffs that would occur in
competitive businesses between capex and
opex tend not to occur in the regulated
sector. Other countries have done this a
different way and have tried to
establish more of a performance-based
framework of regulation that rewards
utilities with profits based on
outcomes. But, you know, the United
States has never got there for a whole
variety of frankly dumb reasons. So,
that's the way the sector is regulated.
It's it's weird to have a sector that is
really regulated according to early 20th
c century standards that's trying to
serve a modern economy to be fully
candid with you. Yeah, it does feel that
way, doesn't it? So, again, I said in
the intro, I do not know much about the
electricity market. I feel like I'm
constantly struggling to try to
understand it. But one thing I do know
is that a lot of the electricity
companies seem to complain for years and
years and years that loads in the US had
actually been either declining or
stagnant. Now, we have the situation
where everyone is talking about data
centers coming on stream and use a lot
of electricity. So, loads are finally
rising. Shouldn't this be a good thing
for the electricity company? Shouldn't
they be celebrating they have extra
money um to spend on if not opex than
capex?
>> Generally, yes. And it's true that for
most electricity markets in the United
States, it's been fairly flat. In the
PJM, the Pennsylvania, New Jersey,
Maryland market that stretches from
Washington DC to Chicago. They last
recorded a record peak demand in 2006.
They'll in all likelihood set a new
demand next year, 20 years later in
2026. Some markets like Texas's Urkott
market have been growing, but it is
definitely the exception to the rule. Mo
most of these people last set a record
demand, you know, before the period of
offshoring and de-industrialization
of industries that use a lot of
electricity and and that actually
facilitated the kind of turnover of
capital from coal gas and to renewables
a little bit as well in a lot of these
places. But net of net, you know, that
was kind of neutral or even a little bit
negative in terms of the total installed
generation capacity. who was kind of
managing to even in terms of generation
capacity additions. And then in terms of
like shouldn't they be celebrating? Yes,
definitely. Everyone in the sector, my
business and the regulated utilities are
excited about the prospect of growth.
They're also nervous about whether or
not this growth is real and to what
magnitude. Part of what makes it a
little worrying is that ordinarily
electricity demand growth would be a
composite of growing demand from many
different enduse applications that would
kind of diversify the risk of betting on
growth. Here it's like a one or a zero.
You know if you take out the data
centers the sector is actually you know
pretty stable in terms of electricity
demand. If you add the data centers the
sector is really poised to grow a heck
of a lot. And when you look at the
projections of the grid operators, I
mean, just to put some numbers on this,
the the market PJM in the Mid-Atlantic
that I was referring to, it's currently
about 160,000 megawatt market. It's
projecting to add 40,000 megawatts by
2030. The Urkott, Texas market, you
know, about 85,000
megawatts right now. Its latest
projection is up to nearly 140,000
megawws by 2030. Now, that's like adding
a California to Texas in terms of
electricity demand in five years. And
that's not going to happen because it
can't. It just I mean, literally could
not occur. But there there in lies the
problem is like what are we actually
investing toward and what are the
regulatory policies that can essentially
help call the question on the amount of
offtake that will actually materialize
from AI so that then capital investments
can propagate throughout the supply
chain to to end up serving them. that
that's really the fundamental question
that policy makers, utilities, and
competitive providers like us are trying
to deal with.
>> Those numbers are absolutely staggering.
The idea of adding California size
demand to Texas in just a standpoint of
a few years. When you say you don't
think those numbers can happen, what is
the constraint? Is it on the generation
side in a market like Texas or if we're
talking about what any other region or
because I think there it's pretty easy
to set up, you know, solar farms or
whatever. Texas seems pretty liberal
with what kind of how easy it is to plug
into the grid or is it in a state like
that there isn't the transmission
capacity even if you can stand up the
production?
>> Yeah, it's I mean it's a little bit of
everything. everything from stuff that
isn't, you know, on the power sector
side of the fence line in terms of
actually being able to construct data
centers and, you know, their chips and
the fiber optics that would back them
up. And then on our side of the fence,
you're right, getting access to the grid
through interconnection, getting all the
equipment that you would need to tap
into the grid. We're talking about, you
know, kind of grid step up generator
stepup transformers and stuff like that.
Joe, I know that's a topic near and dear
to you from listening to the pod over
the years. And then it is the power
equipment in terms of like gas turbine
availability. You know, solar panels
probably aren't going to do it for you
given the demand for, you know, kind of
consistent power production off of these
data centers, but they are helpful. So,
it's just the magnitude there is a
dilemma. And you know right now if I
were to place an order for something
like you know a generator step-up
transformer you know precoid it would
have been maybe like 12 to 18 months.
Now we're talking about 3 to 4 years for
a bespoke piece of equipment whose
specifications are only available to me
after the local utility the poles and
wires company tells me what my
interconnection study looks like in
terms of grid availability and our
connection to the system. So that that's
one. You know, NRG is lucky enough to
have some gas turbines lined up for
delivery, you know, later in this
decade. So we would be able to
facilitate some of this investment. But
if you were going to get in line right
now, that too would be a process that
would take several years. Some of it's
the availability of equipment and some
of it is a natural pacing of steps in
the kind of quasi regulatory process to
get projects online. It would be better.
I I think one of the interesting policy
innovations that's out there is if you
had kind of more of a market to make use
of the scarce remaining headroom in our
system from sort of a grid
interconnection point of view without
tripping into having to build a bunch of
capital investments in poles and wires.
But you know that's not the way the
regulatory model is set up. You know
right now we have a paradigm where if
I'm a power generator I kind of knock on
the door of the local utility and say
hey you know I want to build a power
project at this place can you s can you
study it for the sake of its
interconnection to the grid they come
back with the study and I don't like the
number I don't like the specs and then I
submit another study and we iterate. Um,
so it's a time-consuming process
sometimes to develop these projects and
there probably needs to be avenues that
are more coordinated between the demand
and supply side. And even if you don't,
you know, even if you certainly
shouldn't functionally reintegrate the
utility business model, but there does
need to be more coordination between the
people who own the poles and wires and
the people who are doing the generation.
And that's kind of a missing link right
now in this policy landscape.
>> Other than sheer volume of power needs,
I guess sheer megawws. Do data centers
have specific energy needs in terms of I
don't know the type of electricity? I
would assume a megawatt is a megawatt,
but what do I know? But maybe in terms
of timing and things like that, are
there sort of operational considerations
that are unique to data centers
electricity consumption versus say an
industrial factory or us turning the
lights on when we get home?
>> Yeah. So I mean the first experience you
know at any scale that anyone seemed to
have with computing technologies you
know were kind of you know cloud-based
servers and then really on the other
side like crypto mining facilities and
both of them data centers but the two
could not be more different right I mean
c crypto can it becomes uneconomic at a
certain strike price for cryptocurrency
to continue mining and so it's a highly
flexible load that drops off the system
when conditions become tight in an
electricity market and we see that all
the time in Texas. On the other hand,
for you know cloud services that are
providing kind of real time
instantaneous hosting capabilities you
know they they kind of need they have a
very high what's called a load factor of
their power consumption. They're drawing
from the system on a relatively
consistent basis and of course they need
to be highly reliable. you know they
can't really be interrupted without
having cloudfare or AWS interruption
style problems. So very different and
you can look back to analoges of you
know other industrial customers you know
aluminum smelters highloadad factor when
they were doing the batching of smelting
couldn't be interrupted paper mills
maybe you could interrupt them. So we
the industry has some like kind of
learnings from this and there have been
markets designed around the flexibility
of demand to try to do for the power
sector what previously happened to say
the airline sector which had used to
have you know very low load factor and
then after restructuring and
deregulation in the 70s suddenly
everyone's you know everyone's airplanes
ended up full you know and too full in
some cases where you know people get
bumped and compensated for it. So we're
we've yet to achieve that though in the
power sector where load factors continue
to be you know 50 60 70%. So there's a
lot of headroom during certain hours and
very little headroom during other hours.
So the kind of the primary question in
terms of the network economics is if you
end up with a bunch of high load factor
data center customers, the type that
can't be interrupted, how do you get
them online without tripping into a
bunch of necessary capital investments
to serve that last few% of hours where
their demand needs to be served and
firm? Or can you source flexibility out
of the system somewhere else like from
residential air conditioning or
something like that? That's a question
again that's very important to figure
out. People have kind of issue spotted
it but we've really yet to solve in any
meaningful way. Though markets like
Texas are kind of geared towards solving
it in more of a free enterprise [music]
premise. Other markets seem to be
struggling a bit.
[music]
It's funny to think about getting an
alert on your phone. It's like GPT6 is
completing its training run. Sorry. No,
if we would like you to turn down your
air conditioning right now. No, I don't
know if that would happen. But the part
of the reason everyone's interested in
data centers period, well, there's a lot
of reasons, but people are worried when
they hear these numbers, they're like,
"Oh, am I as the consumer, let's say I
lived in Texas, which I sometimes have,
am I as the consumer going to in some
way or another be paying the price for
this massive expansion of demand thanks
to data centers?" Intuitively, it seems
like, well, it shouldn't be. They could
pay for their own electricity. They
could pay for their own upgrades. But
how does this massive increase in demand
play out from the sort of the rateayer
perspective?
>> Yeah. So we go back to the kind of
segmentation between the regulated grid
costs and the commodity costs on on in
answer to that question on the commodity
side. You know, this tends to be a
marginal cost pricing environment where
if you have demand
growth outstripping supply additions,
the system becomes tighter. The supply
curve moves up for the kind of last unit
that's necessary to serve demand and its
marginal costs in a very real way
establish the clearing price that all
demand has to pay. Unless and to the
extent to they are bilaterally
contracted with some kind of hedging
instruments which everyone should be. No
one should be in an ideal market exposed
to that spot price but we find that many
people are for a variety of reasons. So
some policy interventions that people
have contemplated is you know usually we
would let these markets kind of
equilibriate on their own. we would
expect sort of organic growth to be met
with organic supply additions. Here
people have observed like wow this
demand growth seems really out of scale
with what the markets have organically
been able to achieve. Maybe we should
have a requirement to just bring your
own generation. you know, we're not
going to let the power markets on a
forward traded basis send the right
signal and hope that enough generation
shows up to serve this demand a as sort
of part of the social license or even a
formalized regulatory requirement for
them to get online. You got to show us
the megawatts that you're bringing out
of the system. So that's one of the
debates. On the other side of the
ledger, the regulated costs that too can
be a problem usually in again this
division problem of network economics
for the regulated costs. If you're
adding to that denominator of throughput
at a rate that is higher, then you're
adding two additions to the fixed cost
of the system, everyone's rates go down.
You know, produces a lower quotient,
which is the price of grid consumed
electricity. The problem here is that in
a kind of an inflationary environment
for all the materials, the transformers,
the cabling, everything that goes into
the poles and wires, if you're adding
demand and you're not just using
headroom that already exists on the
system, if you're not increasing that
capacity factor on the system, if you're
tripping into a lot of new capital
expenditures, then even if you're adding
demand that's paying regulated rates, it
may not be enough to offset the total
amount of expenditures incrementally
you're making on the system. So there's
policy interventions there too where you
can try to directly assign the costs
that are caused on the grid back to the
data centers. But those are pretty nent
approaches and some of the ones that
have been tried are kind of aiming at
the wrong thing. So a lot of policy work
remains to be done here and all of this
is kind of a political debate where you
know a lot of state governors the people
who are really the ones kind of in
charge of you know with their state
utility commissions setting these
policies they simultaneously want the
economic development of data centers but
they don't want any negative
externalities around reliability
affordability clean energy and all those
things trade off against one another but
you know political actors will want to
maximize all of those variables.
which is not possible in the current
environment.
>> Can I ask a very basic question? And I'm
struggling to think of a way to frame it
that doesn't sound like I've just taken
an elderly family member to a medical
office or something. But what is a node?
>> A node usually would be a place like a
substation. It is the place on the
physical grid at which electricity is
bought and sold. It's a physical
destination on the grid. When we say
nodal markets, uh, which is a way to
describe electricity markets, we're
referring to markets where electricity
is priced on a so-called locationational
marginal price basis. And the L the
LMPs, as they're called, are based on
physical destinations on the grid called
nodes. I'm just, you know, estimated
guess here, but a market like Texas will
have a few thousand nodes at which
electricity is traded on an individuated
price basis.
>> That seems like such a weird way of
doing it to me. And I'm sure there are
very valid reasons for doing it in this
way. But like nowadays, given all the
data at our disposal, given the rise of
AI, can't we work out some sort of
average cost across the system? It seems
really weird that we're taking it at
like physical points. Although I guess
you know there are plenty of commodities
that do trade based on particular
locations, but it just seems strange to
me.
>> Well, it is important that you have
nodal pricing in the system o only
because it sends a powerful price signal
for the accurate location of necessary
power generation. There are certain
markets, I'm thinking of Alberta, some
of the European markets that actually do
establish a zonal price across their
entire market. But there you end up with
power plant developers, you know, who
develop wind in a particular area far
away from demand to capture the average
price, but then that energy ends up
being undeliverable because there are
transmission system constraints and
congestion. So the nodal pricing
formulation is intended to reflect a
market that unlike the stock exchange
isn't just trading bits of data to
represent kind of paper securities. It
in a very real way is meant to simulate
a kind of flow of electrons on a system
constrained basis. And then it provides
valuable information too because if you
continue to see locationational marginal
prices, you know, in one place that are
very high and 20 miles away they're very
low. That's a signal to the people who
plan the transmission grid that hey, you
know, we should probably build a
transmission line here because the
addition of the transmission line will
be the thing that flattens out that
price differential and creates a market
that looks more like a, you know, a
copper plate rather than two separate
swimming pools.
>> Interesting. Just to be clear though, if
I wanted to be public enemy number one,
could I build a gigantic data center
next to a locationational marginal price
point node and affect the cost of
electricity for, you know, a greater
area?
>> Yes, you absolutely could. And in fact,
I mean, I know of at least one example.
You know, North Dakota is actually a
good example of this. A place that is
doesn't have a lot of robust
transmission infrastructure does have a
lot of renewable resources that cause
and those renewables are almost kind of
dumping on the market in a way that
causes the energy price to go down and
even negative at times in North Dakota.
And you know, some of the first data
centers that we've seen in this wave of
expansion chose to locate in North
Dakota because they had access to
wholesale prices that were low or
negative. they were just following the
price signal. And so there's, you know,
there's certain data centers out there
that are literally being paid to consume
electricity because there's such an over
supply and so little transmission into
the area.
>> I, you know, I got asked this question
on a podcast recently and I didn't have
a good answer and I so now I want to
ask. So you mentioned, okay, all these
different pieces of electrical gear,
they're in short supply. You might not
be able to get some key equipment until
2030. Is that strain going to ease at
all? Is there any additional capacity
coming on the market? When I was asked
this, I like sort of like hesitated. I
was like, well, maybe they're not sure
about the future, so they're like
reluctant to do the capital expending
involved. But do you think there's any
like is capacity growing for some of
this core infrastructure? As far as you
could tell,
>> my impression is yes. I mean, you've
seen public announcements from the
largest gas turbine manufacturer, GE
Vernova, about new manufacturing base
additions. you know, some of the
transformer equipment as well. I think
you're seeing some incremental
investment in you're certainly seeing
power generators like NRG, you know,
take positions in lining up their
optionality to have power projects that
can be deployable to either the Texas
market or the Mid-Atlantic market
depending on where consumer demand
actually arises. So, I I I think there
is some development in that market. I I
will say I think what people are waiting
for you know everyone looks around the
supply chain and you know is reasonably
asking well who's got the deep pockets
here and then everyone turns to big tech
you know big tech obviously if they
signed a power purchase agreement for 15
years or even less to take power at a
certain price some of this supply chain
would fall into place pretty readily I
would say and so people are kind of
waiting in a sense for big tech to make
those big bilateral contracting moves
that would serve to propagate uh sort of
rationality around response to the
perceived demand up and down the supply
chain. And I think that's kind of the
leading indicator to watch for in the
sector. How many of those contracts are
actually being signed?
>> Big tech is just going to do everything.
They're going to build nuclear plants
and they're going to build their own
chips and they're going to build their
own fabs and everything. It'll be this
entire ecosystem that is just alphabets
from down the line. I want to go back
though to something you said which is
that part of what's tricky about the
data center thing is that okay here's
this big boom in demand but it's not
because of like general like trend
economic growth and you could be perhaps
that in a year from now or 6 months from
now or tomorrow people say oh that I
want to slam the brakes on a AI spending
we're not getting this return fears of a
bubble you know forth talk to us a
little bit more how the commissions are
dealing with this risk and this very
Yeah. Binary state of planning.
>> Yeah. So commissions at the state level
have dealt with this in a very different
way. Some of them have candidly and
regulated utilities themselves have said
we want no part of this risk. Like we're
a small midcap utility and someone is
knocking at our door asking us to invest
in power generation. That would be like
a third of our total existing balance
sheet that's remained stable for
decades. We're just not doing it. You
can get on our grid and you can pay the
cost to get on our grid, but in terms of
power generation, you've got to bring
your own project. We're not involved in
that. Other utilities that have larger
balance sheets, the Southeastern
utilities are using their regulated
balance sheets to build out generation
and supply data center customers, devils
in the details on those heavily redacted
commercial agreements that I would I
would desperately love to see about the
degree to which they protect consumers.
And then of course the other side of the
industry, the competitive industry. You
know, it's companies like mine and data
centers that enter into commercial
agreements for the B purchase and sale
of power. And neither of those parties
have recourse to a captive base of
customers. So they could go bust, we
could go bust. It's not going to, you
know, be skin off the teeth of a set of
quote unquote rateayers. Again, on the
grid costs, it's about whether or not
state commisss, and in this case, a
federal regulator, the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission, are going to
style take or pay contractual agreements
to require large data centers that come
onto the grid to essentially
collateralize
a revenue stream associated with the
incremental costs of developing the grid
to serve them. And so far there seems to
be relative unonymity that that is the
right way to go in order to protect
legacy customers. But again, the devil's
in the details and I I have a problem
with some of the math that's being done
in those regulatory approaches. So it's
not as if this problem is invisible to
the people who are economically
regulating this industry, but they are
trying to in a very real way they are
trying to figure it out in real time.
and they and I'll be the first to say
their solution set is far from perfect.
So just on this note, it strikes me that
the difficulty in the system, I mean,
setting aside the patchwork of 50
different states all having their own
different regulations. Like the heart of
the difficulty in the current system is
we're trying to preserve the market
signal for further investment but also
smooth out some of the volatility so
that Joe and I don't have to spend an
inordinate amount of time thinking about
what is like the most cost-effective
time to blow dry our hair or do our
laundry or something like that. So we're
kind of trying to have our capitalism
cake and eat it too. cakealism. Kodalism
that kind of works. What is your
platonic ideal of a electricity market?
Do you have one either in the US or
elsewhere in the world that you would
say look here is a system that actually
manages to do both these things?
>> Yeah, man. I love that question. I mean,
I I will say the one of the real flaws
in the US electricity system is that it
is not as robustly a two-sided market as
you would hope for. It's still demand
just exists on the system. It's coming
onto the system based on people's on the
supply side guesses about what will
happen and then the supply side is
expected to solve all of it. there's
very little in the way of demand
elasticity and that's been for a variety
of historical reasons. I mean the first
and most obvious one is that you didn't
even have the technology in the form of
advanced metering infrastructure to
understand when people were actually
using the power in relation to a highly
time variable set of upstream costs. Now
you do have that you are also
increasingly having the software that
allows financial settlements on the part
of the people retailing electricity to
enduse consumers to be settled on the
basis of that advanced metering
infrastructures actual meter reads. So
on a time interval basis and finally
because you shouldn't have to think
about when you're going to blow dry your
hair, you have a significant amount of
device automation in the form of smart
thermostats, battery storage, electric
vehicles, manufacturing and industrial
processes which can be sort of a set it
and forget it to automatically respond
to high prices to try to increase the
systems load factor and avoid using
electricity at very high cost times. So
that is just starting to happen in the
American electricity sector. I would
tend to look to the UK and Australia as
places that have gone a bit ways further
in trying to solve that problem and
embrace the inherent flexibility of the
system as versus the United States which
is kind of stuck in this sort of supply
does something to demand framework of
industry. So that that's definitely on
my like it's always on the top of my
homework list if only because I think a
lot of people are thinking about solving
this problem highly conventionally with
supply editions which is going to be
really important but that demand
flexibility component is actually
essential to get to a market that looks
like every other efficient and
competitive market in the world which
has two sides to it. We've been talking
a lot about sort of the future looking
forward and figuring out, you know, how
that we're going to get all this uh this
new capacity onto the market, etc. Let's
look at the last several years. Like
what happened? Part of the reason we're
even having this conversation is because
electricity bills are on people's minds,
right? And they've been high and it's a
little unclear like how much of this is
just keeping up with inflation. I
presume that like grid maintenance is
actually straightforwardly an effect of
labor cost inflation etc. One thing we
do know however is that the pace of
electricity price increases really since
the pandemic seems to have been a level
step up. What's driven that? How would
you characterize the last several years
of electricity prices and perhaps the
role of load growth in driving those
increases? Yeah. So, so far load growth
is really not the contributor to what
has happened here. It is almost an
awakening to the fact that we had
already without any more load growth a
less reliable system than we thought we
did. And that's due to a variety of
reasons. you know, we retired a lot of
coal, which, you know, had a lot of
emissions, but we replaced it with a
bunch of natural gas. That created a,
you know, a a sort of more of a
dependency on an interrelated network
system, the gas supply and pipeline
system, which while usually very robust
and very economically efficient, in
winter conditions where there's a lot of
residential heating drawn, that system
can show frailties. And so market
operators in these electricity markets
sort of derated the value of that
capacity in how they set up these
markets which meant effectively a sort
of administrative withdrawal of supply
from some of these markets. Similar to
that, renewables were seen not as a
onetoone replacement for reliable
generation in the parts of the country,
the middle of the country especially
where they were heavily invested in, but
they were really being leaned on as an
effective substitute for more
dispatchable power. And I think everyone
in the back of their head knew that
wasn't the case, but only recently have
as things have gotten tight have people
begun to do a lot of hard math around
it. And then finally, you know, we've
just seen a few really traumatic winter
storms in particular, one in the east
and one in Texas that have sort of
reshaped the way in which the people who
have responsibility to operate the grid
think about the operational posture and
need for reliable resources on the grid.
And so there were a variety of
regulatory changes that were made that
had net of net the effect to tighten up
the understanding of what generating
capacity was available in the system
relative to a base of demand that really
didn't change. But suddenly because of
all of the retirements that had happened
of coal and older gas due to economics
as well as environmental regulation we
suddenly found ourselves pretty tight.
And then this demand growth started to
happen. So we were not particularly well
positioned for the present moment of
demand growth. We had already driven the
system to, you know, some might call it
a tight and efficient system if you had
demand growth that was level, but it was
not well situated to pick up tens and
tens of new gigawatts of demand. I have
a hypothetical question, but just as a
theoretical exercise, if we are all in
the pursuit of cheap and plentiful
energy, and if as part of that pursuit,
you could choose between two options,
you could either wave a magic wand and
get a bunch of nuclear reactors
scattered around America, or you could
wave a magic wand and get huge advances
in battery technology across America.
Which of those would be most conducive
to having that cheap and plentiful
energy supply?
>> Yeah, I mean I I'm going to make a lot
of my friends unhappy with this one, but
I'd probably go batteries and storage. I
think there are some natural economic
advantages in wide swaths of the country
for relatively affordable even without
subsidies. Solar production in
particular and batteries seem like a
pretty good natural match to that. It
really has been in the kind of Texas
story to date, the pairing of batteries
and solar together with natural gas
additions that have supported really the
only electricity market that has been
growing without data centers. So, I
would take that as the leading
indicator. That's not to speak ill of my
friends in the nuclear bro community. I
I hope that technology advances that
seem to be occurring in the small
modular space come to fruition. I just
so far I don't see a lot of people
laying down serious capital on that from
a commercial perspective, but I do see
people laying down money on storage.
>> I just have one last question and it's
kind of cheating. I'm actually my this
question I'm kind of have going to have
you do our work for us, etc., you know,
I'm trying to think of a really good
title for this episode, but if you look
out over the next five years, you know,
you mentioned adding a whole California
to Texas. How are you thinking about the
scale of the challenge overall that the
US electricity system that the grid
overall really faces in this moment?
Like how big is it that everyone from
companies like yours to the various
utility commissions like how big is this
uh challenge going to be?
>> It could be a substantial one. I mean I
think that AI demand growth for
electricity consumption is real. I also
think that that growth needs to pony up
financial commitments to engender
capital investments in the power sector
that it intends to rely upon. I think
those will be the table stakes of their
social license to operate in a grid that
even where competition has been
introduced remains pretty heavily
regulated. So I I think we're going to
get there. I I do think that in terms of
the regulatory policy that I deal with,
there's too much small ball thinking on
this and there's too much trust in the
way we've always done things. It's
probably a time to really have kind of
regulatory policy innovations like we've
seen with the FCC regulating spectrum
and the deregulation of the airline
industry that tries to allocate the
capacity on the grid to the highest
value, the people who are actually
willing to pay the most for it. and
those payments which would likely exceed
the incremental costs of serving them
could then actually be a revenue source
back to consumers that helps on the
affordability side. So I, you know, it's
almost a call to your listeners that,
you know, if you're doing a uh a mundane
corporate job and want to do something
completely different, consider becoming
a utility regulator and applying some
market-based principles to to help solve
some of these problems because really
when you think about it, utility
regulation, they need to be an agent of
capital formation here in the sector and
to clarify this [music] moment in terms
of demand uncertainty. And that is the
kind of challenge on a conceptual basis
that we're grappling with.
>> Travis Cavula, you know, we could talk
to you for hours actually just on, you
know, I have a million more questions
just about specifics from your time in
Montana and how all those things work.
But uh we'll let you go. Really
appreciate your time. Let's do it again
sometime. And uh I did learn a few
things on this episode. So appreciate
you coming on OddLog.
>> Thank you [music] so much.
>> Thank you so much, Thomas. That was
great.
>> [music]
>> Tracy, I really like that. I really like
the way you put it there in your
question of we want to have a marketish
environment and demand signals are
pretty important, etc. And we want
capital to flow where it's going to be
profitable and all that. We just don't
really want any of the pain [laughter]
associated with the market.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And I mean the irony is that
the market could be functioning as
intended in the sense that a large
consumer of power like a data center
decides to relocate itself to a place
where energy costs are actually quite
low
>> and then because it does that ends up
distributing you know the cost of its
own power needs across a wider area. And
it all seems I mean I'm just going to go
back to what I said earlier. It all
seems so convoluted
>> and so idiosyncratic across different
jurisdictions. I do actually really
respect Travis's call just then. If
you're interested in markets and want to
have an impact on people's everyday
lives, consider trying to clean up the
mess that is energy regulation. But you
know even in the nonconvoluted
version of it if we just imagine the
platonic ideal of a normal market and
there's this commodity electrons and
it's well what if AI is this really
valuable thing and it's more valuable
than blow drying your hair. I mean for
real this could be a thing like you know
we were talking about making cars or
making steel etc. would be like oh yeah
well this is this value productive
thing.
>> I wasn't going to do it. I wasn't going
to, but now I'm gonna bring up that time
you wrote that mining crypto could
theoretically be a more valuable
activity than running a fridge.
>> Well, right, this is the question. In a
normal market, the reason why that
example seems absurd, I'm glad you
actually brought up because the reason
why that example seems absurd is because
very few people could ever wrap their
heads around, well, could crypto mining
be more valuable or value ad than
running a fridge. That being said, when
it comes to something like AI, there
really is a debate. And some people
would say that's a total waste because
AI is just a costly way to make fast
poems. And other people would say, no,
this is the fourth industrial revolution
or whatever. And so I think part of the
reason we're sort of uncomfortable with
the oh let's just move the electrons to
where they're who's going to pay for
them most is because I don't think a lot
of people there are a lot of people who
intuitively are skeptical that this is a
good allocation of real resources
>> right I mean I think politically the
message that the cost of your
electricity has to go up so that AI can
do its thing and you can lose your job
is an extremely unpalatable one. No,
it's totally it's totally I think this
is why it's going to like break a lot of
people's brands. But on the other hand,
if we accept that, you know, the belief
that markets are generally good
allocators of resources, etc., they're
like, well, it's not really our job to
have an opinion on this is a good use,
this is not a good use. But anyway, I I
did find that to be a very um
interesting conversation. It does seem
like those commissions that have to
decide what is an appropriate amount to
spend on upgrades and capacity, they
really have their uh work cut out for
them right now.
>> Yeah. The way I would put it is they are
not always the most popular people among
their respective jurisdictions. That's
for sure.
>> Well, someone has to have the job of
doing the unpopular stuff, right?
Someone has to have the job of
adequately compensating investors in
utilities for the risks that they take
on in providing a necessary commodity
for life and the fourth industrial
revolution.
>> That's right.
>> All right. Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the
OddLotss podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy.
>> And I'm Jill Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our guest
Travis Cavula. He's tavula. Follow our
producers Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen
Armano Bennett at-bot and Kaleb Brooks
at kalebrooks. For more OddLots content,
go to bloomberg.com/odlots
where we have the daily newsletter and
all of our episodes. And you can chat
about all these topics 247 in our
Discord, discord.gg/odlotss.
[music]
>> And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when we try to untangle the US utility
landscape, [music] then please leave us
a positive review on your favorite
podcast platform. And remember, if you
are a Bloomberg subscriber, you can
listen to all of our episodes absolutely
adree. [music] All you need to do is
find the Bloomberg channel on Apple
Podcast and follow the instructions
there. Thanks for listening.
>> [music]